number 37 and look at this passage of Scripture. We are going to observe the
Lord's Supper this evening and so my plan is to preach a little bit shorter
from this portion of Scripture and close out this aspect of the service and then
we'll transition into 1 Corinthians 11 and observe the Lord's Supper this
evening. Last week as we looked at this portion of Genesis chapter 37 we
addressed the obedience of Joseph to the mission that was given to him by Jacob.
We understand that Jacob calls Joseph and says that he wanted him to go and
Joseph was completely surrendered and submissive to the plan that his father
gave him and we find that that mission that was given to Joseph was a mission
that resulted in him being put into the pit and eventually sold for 20 pieces of
silver to be a slave. And as I mentioned last week on Sunday evening I do not
believe that Joseph understood that that would be the result of this trip of
fulfilling that which he was given orders from his father to do. I do not
believe that Jacob thought that Joseph wouldn't come home. I think that Jacob's
expectation was that Joseph would return after he sent him on this mission and we
find that while this all was unfolding and as Joseph is being carried away
after being sold into slavery the brothers realize that they need to give
some type of an answer and I believe that they now are seeking to execute the
plan that they simply made mention of in verse number 20. We'll be looking
specifically at verses 31 through 35 but notice in verse number 20 when they're
there in Dothan and they see Joseph coming, remember before he was there they
conspired against him to slay him. They said behold this dreamer cometh and in
verse number 20 it says come now therefore and let us slay him and cast
him into some pit and we will say some evil beast hath devoured him and we
shall see what will become of his dreams. We find that they did not slay Joseph. We
find that they decided to put him in the pit and figure out what they were going
to do and then as those merchantmen came by they decided to sell him instead of
killing him and they do not tell Jacob specifically that an evil beast hath
devoured him as they make mention in verse number 20 but we do see the
execution of the plan and we find that the Bible tells us, I want you to notice
in verse 35, we'll read the verse and get into the message, it says and all his son
speaking of Jacob and his daughters rose up to comfort him but he refused to
be comforted and he said for I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning
thus his father wept for him. I've titled the message this evening Jacob wept for
Joseph. Notice with me if you're taking notes this evening the behavior of the
brothers. We begin reading in verse number 31 the brothers sell Joseph into
slavery and notice in verse number 31 the Bible says that they took Joseph's
coat and killed a kid of the goats and dipped the coat in the blood and they sent the
coat of many colors and they brought it to their father and said this have we
found. Know now whether it be thy son's coat or no. In verses 31 and 32 God gives
us insight with regard to the behavior of these brothers and we find that there
was an elaborate attempt that they make in order to cover their sin, to cover
what it was that they did and we find that as we look at this portion of
scripture they take and they they kill a kid of the goats and they take that
coat of many colors that coat that was the distinguishing characteristic for
Joseph I understand as we look and we mentioned last week that even as they
saw him coming from afar how is it what was it that identified that that's
Joseph that comes no doubt that coat of many colors and they take that coat
which was a clear indication of Joseph's identity and they take that coat and they
dip it in the blood and then they take and they send they bring that coat to
their father and notice what they say in verse 32 this have we found. Really? You
found it? What did the Bible tell us that happened when he got there the Bible
tells us when Joseph arrived in Dothan in verse 18 when they saw him far off
even before he came near unto them they conspired against him to slay him right
and they have this idea as to what they're going to do and the Bible tells
us that they stripped him of his coat in verse number 23 it says and it came to
pass when Joseph was come unto his brethren so they had this plan as he was
approaching but when they when he arrives in their presence it says in
verse 23 that they stripped Joseph out of his coat his coat of many colors that
was on him they did not send him to Egypt with that coat they kept the coat
and they say to Jacob this have we found and notice the question no now whether
it be thy son's coat or no. Now they obviously understood what Jacob would
believe at the sight of this coat it was Jacob that gave Joseph the coat and
there was an understanding as to what would take place but I want you to think
about this elaborate attempt on the part of these brothers to cover their sin and
we find that this is in line with other examples that we find in the Bible it's
Adam and Eve in Genesis chapter 3 that make an attempt to cover their sin we
find that when sin enters into the world as we read the record in Genesis
chapter 3 that their eyes were opened and immediately they take and they take
these fig leaves and they try to cover their nakedness but the Bible also tells
us that they hid from God. God knew where they were when God comes into the garden
and he says and he calls unto them it's not that he doesn't know where they are
that he's calling for them it's that he is letting them know of his presence and
that he's seeking them and we find that God provides for them there in that
passage of scripture a coat of skin an animal sacrifice had to be made thus
giving us the first of those pictures throughout the Old Testament of Messiah
who would one day come and shed his precious blood. I think about Rachel and
we read of this several weeks ago as we've been studying probably several
months ago at this point as we're studying through the book of Genesis and
we read in chapter number 31 remember that she stole those images from her
father when they left and she hid those images and she was trying to cover her
sin. We're familiar of course with Achan the
troubler of Israel is how he is described in the book of 1st Chronicles
and we find that Achan he took of the accursed thing he took that which was
forbidden we know that God gave specific instruction to Joshua and to the
children of Israel as they entered in for the conquest of the land and we find
that Achan thought that he could take of the spoils it's a picture of the first
fruits that belong to the Lord and Achan took it and he hid it. What about David?
David thought he could cover his sin. David concocted a quite elaborate plan
even as we see here with the brothers of Joseph he developed this plan that he
thought no doubt his mind was foolproof that no one would understand what was
taking place but obviously God did. See man from the garden through these
examples that I've referenced briefly we could go on and on all the way
through human history until this very present day man has a tendency to try to
cover his sin to cover his sin. Can I tell you this evening there's no point
in trying to cover your sin because God Almighty who knows all things knows
about your sin about my sin he knew about Adam and Eve he knew about Rachel
he knew about Achan he knew about David and we can just go right down the line
God knows God knows and there's no point in trying to cover our sin we find that
God in his omniscience he knows all things but God in his mercy he's offered
forgiveness. Notice what the Bible says over in Psalm 69 and we'll reference a
couple of verses that you're familiar with no doubt these verses of Scripture
but but here's what I find in life is we can be familiar with something we can
understand a principle a concept a truth and yet never actually apply it in our
lives. We can be familiar with a biblical teaching we can have the truth given to
us and we can agree with the truth but then when the practice of life comes we
go back to the normal tendency of humankind to say I'm gonna cover my sin
I'm gonna cover my transgression. In Psalm 69 in verse number 5 notice what
the Bible says it says O God thou knowest my foolishness and my sins are
not hid from thee. That's a true biblical declaration is it not? Your sins my sins
It's David's, this Psalm 69 is ascribed to David.
David, do you think David understood in a very real way
that his sins were not hid from God?
I mean, think about David.
He thought he had this elaborate plan to cover his sin.
He thought no one's gonna find out
about this situation with Bathsheba.
And he went through this process of bringing Uriah home
and we're gonna take care
and everyone's gonna think that the child
is the result of husband and wife,
but Uriah, he had great character
and he did not go in unto his wife.
And we find that David then said,
I'm gonna have to have this man killed.
And he writes the letter that he would carry
to his commanding officer that would result in his death.
And we find that David then marries Bathsheba
all in an attempt to cover his sin.
But just a prophet of God
that God revealed what happened to,
stands in David's presence and says, thou art the man.
David, you may have hid your sin from
and you could lay out the list, but God knows.
And here as David under the inspiration
of the Holy Spirit of God would write this Psalm,
he says, oh God, thou knowest my foolishness
and my sins are not hid from thee.
Those are the Bible says over in Proverbs 28.
In Proverbs 28, we all agree this evening,
the Bible is true.
We believe that that verse of scripture,
David's testimony under the inspiration
of Holy Spirit of God in Psalm 69 is a true thing.
Your sins, just as David's sins,
my sins, our sins are not hid from God.
Do you agree with that tonight?
They're not hid from God, he knows about it.
Proverbs 28, the Bible says this in verse 13.
He that covereth his sins shall not prosper.
Is that hard to understand?
It really isn't.
So many people say, oh, the Bible is so hard to understand.
I understand there's a few passages of scriptures
that are a little bit more complicated than others,
but I'm so thankful the Holy Spirit of God
who is the divine teacher and author of God's word
indwells us and he teaches us.
But most of the Bible is really not that hard to understand.
You know where the hard part comes?
Applying it, being a doer of the word.
The Bible says he that covereth his sins shall not prosper.
Now we like the Bible word shall.
When it comes to a verse like Romans 10 and verse 13,
for whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved.
And when we quote that verse of scripture,
we like that word shall.
And we say, listen, it doesn't mean that you might be saved.
It doesn't mean that you could be saved.
It's certain you shall be saved.
Well, here the Bible says that you shall not prosper.
But whoso, look at the contrast.
The one who covers his sins shall not prosper.
But it says this in verse 13, what a great contrast.
But whoso confesseth and forsaketh them,
the sins, shall have mercy.
Isn't that a wonderful truth of God's word?
So basically, the option that is before us
when you sin, when I sin, when anybody sins,
the option that is before us is to cover our sin
or to confess our sin.
And if we cover our sin, the Bible says
you shall not prosper.
If we confess and forsake, the Bible says
ye shall have mercy.
Now, if we look at the result, which one do you want?
Do you want mercy or do you want shall not prosper?
I don't think any one of us would say
I'm gonna line up on the side that says shall not prosper.
Right, no one wants to be in that line.
Everyone wants to be in the line that says shall have mercy.
So why do we cover our sin?
It's a human tendency.
It's not just Adam and Eve.
It's not just Rachel.
It's not just the sons of Jacob here,
the brothers of Joseph.
It's not just Achan and David.
No, no, no, it's a human tendency
to try to cover our sins.
You know why I know it's a human tendency?
You ever observed the behavior of children?
Most children, you don't have to teach them to lie.
You don't have to teach them to cover their sin.
You don't.
It's in them.
It's in you.
And this evening, when we look at this passage of scripture
in Genesis 37, the very first thing,
we understand the historical context
of what God is telling us,
but as we make the spiritual application,
we see that here, and we look at some,
excuse me, at Genesis 37, verses 31 and 32,
and we say I can't believe they would do that.
But then we sin, and we try to cover our sin.
We may not do the same thing that the sons of Joseph did,
excuse me, the brothers of Joseph did.
We may not go through the same process,
but we try to cover our sin,
and we find that they go through this elaborate process
to try to cover their sin,
but I want you to know, even as I made mention last week,
that though they had received those pieces of silver,
20 pieces for 10 brothers, two pieces each,
and though they went through this process
of trying to cover their sin,
they tried to cover their tracks,
and they tried to appease their conscience,
we know that the Bible would reveal to us,
as you read in chapter 42 and verse number 21,
that it haunted them.
I'm thankful this evening that my Bible
and your Bible tells us about God,
that he is a God who is ready to pardon.
He is a God who is ready to forgive.
And this evening, as we look at the historical account,
and we see what's happening here
with the brothers of Joseph,
we find that they go through this process
of trying to cover their sin.
Their behavior is not exemplary.
We find that their behavior is problematic,
but yet we, in our own lives, if we're not careful,
we sin and try to cover our sin.
We try to cover our sin.
But we understand, the Bible says,
that we shall not prosper.
Notice, as we continue back in Genesis chapter 37,
we see the behavior of the brothers,
but I want you to note, number two,
the belief of Jacob.
Note carefully, as we look at this text,
and I've made mention of it already,
that they do not tell Jacob that this is Joseph's coat.
No, they do not tell Jacob that Joseph has been killed.
They know that Joseph wasn't killed.
They sold him into slavery.
They simply ask questions,
knowing how Jacob is going to respond to what he sees.
I've already made mention,
as we looked at this portion of Scripture last week,
with regard to the journey that Joseph was sent on,
and we think about that mission
that he was given from his father,
and to go from where he was there with his father
to go to Shechem was a 60-mile journey,
and he would take from Hebron to Shechem that 60 miles,
and then he would have to travel an additional 12 miles
to go down to Dothan,
and no doubt, there was some difficult terrain.
There was some potential danger
that Joseph would face along the way.
So now, all of a sudden, the brothers return.
Now, remember, the brothers were gone,
evidently for an extended period of time,
such that Jacob said, I need to send you, Joseph,
to find out, to see what's going on.
Now, all of a sudden, the brothers return,
and they bring this coat, and they say, we found this.
Do you know whose coat this is?
Now, if you have something that's very recognizable,
and someone brings it to you and says,
hey, do you know whose this is?
Ah, I mean, you're gonna easily identify it.
Jacob had given this coat to his son.
We know that it was the coat,
according to verse number three of Genesis 37,
the Bible says, now Israel loved Joseph
more than all his children
because he was the son of his old age,
and he made him a coat of many colors.
And so, you understand that he was intimately
understanding what this coat was
and who this coat belonged to,
and they asked this question
as they give this coat of many colors
that's saturated in blood, the blood of a goat,
and they simply allowed Jacob to reach a conclusion.
The conclusion that Jacob reaches
is a conclusion that's given to us in verse number 33,
and he knew it, they knew that he would recognize the coat,
and he said, it is my son's coat.
Notice what he says, an evil beast hath devoured him.
Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
Now, do these 10 brothers know that that wasn't true?
They knew that wasn't true,
but you know what they did?
They allowed Jacob to believe that.
In my estimation, this is one of the greatest examples
in the Bible of deception, of deception.
So many people say, well, lying and deceiving isn't really lying.
It is.
If you want to split hairs and draw lines, that's up to you.
But the reality is that they allowed this man Jacob, their father, to believe this lie.
They knew the truth.
And yet they allowed him through this process of deception.
Now notice as we look at the text, they could excuse their behavior.
Well, we didn't tell him that it was Jacob's, or excuse me, Joseph's.
We didn't tell him that he was dead.
We don't read that that happens in the text of Scripture.
But I want you to understand that we so often excuse.
We look at this text and look at the covering and the elaborate plan to try to cover their
deeds and what they did.
But then as we would think about our own lives, there are times in which we excuse our behavior.
Well, I didn't really say that.
I didn't really do that.
We find here in the text of Scripture that Jacob believes, I mean, he's confident in
what he believes as the evidence is there before him and he knows the coat.
This is my son's coat.
And there's no doubt, he says, an evil beast hath devoured him.
Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces.
That's what he believed.
We see the behavior of the brothers.
We see the belief of Jacob as we continue and finish through the text of Scripture.
We see the brokenness of Jacob.
The brokenness of Jacob.
This news of receiving this coat and reaching the conclusion that he reaches in verse number
33 led Jacob to a place of complete brokenness.
As we read in verses 34 and 35, and the Bible says in verse 35, and Jacob rent his clothes
and put on sackcloth upon his loins and mourned for his son many days.
Now it's interesting to me as I look at this portion of Scripture to consider the sons
of Jacob standing before him and observing his response.
A man who has rent his clothes, who has put on the sackcloth upon his loins, who is mourning
for his son, and they know the truth.
They're happy to just let him sit there and be broken.
It's unbelievable.
The cold heart of these brothers.
The Bible says, it's very interesting as you look in verse 35, that all his sons and all
his daughters rose up to comfort him.
How in the world could these boys try to comfort him when they knew the truth?
And they're trying to comfort their father.
Now the Bible tells us that he refused to be comforted.
But as I begin to think about the behavior of the boys and looking at what's happening
there, how could they actually, you know Job said miserable comforters are ye all, right?
And you look here, I don't think that the sons of Jacob, the brothers of Joseph would
be very good comforters.
They knew the truth.
And yet they rise up and they try to comfort him.
Do you see how they continue to go through the lengths of trying to cover and to try
to appease their conscience?
We find that the Bible says that he, Jacob, refused to be comforted.
And notice what the Bible says.
Here's what he concludes, for I will go down into the grave unto my son mourning.
Jacob did not know how many more days, years he had to live.
The conclusion that he reaches is that until I take my final breath, I'm going to be mourning
for my son.
Why do you think, as the Bible concludes in verse 35, thus his father wept for him?
Jacob wept for Joseph.
Why is it that Jacob is weeping for his son?
Why is it that he says I'll go to my grave mourning for my son?
No doubt there's the love and the concern that a parent has for their children, but
I wonder this evening that as you look at the text of Scripture, perhaps there was some
level in which Jacob was blaming himself for what has transpired.
For Jacob was the one that sent Joseph on the mission.
And he's reached the conclusion his sons allow him to reach falsely.
The conclusion that a wild beast hath devoured him, an evil beast hath devoured him, and
he's wondering maybe if I would have sent him with more people, maybe if I…
You understand how our minds play games.
And as we look at this man that's weeping, that's mourning, all the while Joseph's actually
alive.
And the brothers know it.
They're aware of it.
We'll deal with it in more detail as we continue to study through the book of Genesis and as
we continue to deal with all that takes place with regard to the behavior of Joseph and
where he ends up and all that's taking place.
But we find that as we've referenced already in chapter 42 and verse number 21, that the
brothers on that first encounter with Joseph there in Egypt, notice what they say.
It says that they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother and
that we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us and we would not hear.
Therefore is this distress come upon us.
We find that as we continue and begin to see what's taking place that the brothers continue
to be fearful and they continue to have concern.
And they ask the question, they remember Jacob sends the boys to go again, but what was the
Joseph gave this one condition by which he would see his brothers again.
Who remembers what it was?
Yeah, Benjamin had to come, right?
And then what happens?
Benjamin is apprehended.
All of a sudden you start to see more brokenness on the part of these brothers.
They say how can we tell our father that Benjamin, and we'll deal with all of this as we continue
to go through the portion of scripture through the book of Genesis before Joseph will eventually
reveal himself to his brothers.
It's interesting in verse number 31 of chapter 44, notice what the Bible says.
We'll actually back up just a little bit into verse number 25, verse 24 of chapter number
44, verse 24, it says, and it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant, my father,
we told him the words of my Lord.
And our father said, go again and buy us a little food.
Verse 26.
And we said, we cannot go down.
If our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down for we may not see the man's face
except our youngest brother be with us.
Now did Jacob want to send Benjamin?
No, he was resistant to the idea of sending Benjamin.
No doubt the thought of Joseph was on his mind and he was resistant to that.
And we find that it says in verse number 27, and my servant, my father said unto us, you
know that my wife bear me two sons and the one went out from me and I said, surely he
is torn in pieces and I saw him not since.
Who is that?
Joseph's the one that's hearing these words.
The brothers are rehearsing this to him.
They don't know that it's Joseph yet, but Joseph knows that it's them.
And if you take this also, verse 29, from me and mischief befall him, you shall bring
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.
Now therefore, when I am come to thy servant, my father, and the lad be not with us, seeing
that his life is bound up in the lad's life, it shall come to pass when he seeth that the
lad is not with us, that he will die.
And thy servant shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant, our father, with sorrow
to the grave.
You know what God's doing over these next several chapters in the book of Genesis?
He's breaking the sons of Jacob because of their sin.
The Bible says the way of transgressors is hard.
That's what the Bible says.
This evening, when we look at Genesis 37, and again, I've just kind of spotted through
some of the chapters and looking at how God would work to break the sons of Jacob because
they covered their sins.
They had a guilty conscience, and God is working to break them over those next several chapters
and years.
This isn't just a few weeks, I mean, these are years that transpire that they're dealing
with this.
But what I'd say this evening, you cover your sin, you shall not prosper.
Wouldn't it be so much better to just have mercy, to have forgiveness?
You know, I wonder this evening, it's as if, I heard somebody say this once years and years
ago, no one that's here.
They said, well, I don't want to go to the altar during a service because somebody might
think I'm a sinner.
Really?
really, somebody might think, we all know that we're sinners. Amen? And you know all
that that is is pride. It's just pride. It's just pride. And by the way, the Bible says
God resisteth the proud, but He giveth grace to the humble.
This evening, we look at a historical account here in the book of Genesis, the 37th chapter.
We can scratch our head and say, how could they do that? When we make spiritual application
to their behavior, and then we examine our own lives, we're saying, why is it at times
that we try to cover our own sin? Why do we try to make excuses for our behavior, excuse
our sin? We have a God who knows everything. Our sins are not hid from God. And He says
that if we confess our sins, He's faithful and just to forgive us, to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. What a blessing to know that He that confesseth and forsaketh shall
have mercy. See, we don't have to live for days. We don't have to live for hours, days,
weeks, months, or years with a guilty conscience. We don't have to go through all sorts of things
where God is breaking us. We can simply confess it to a God who loves us and promises to forgive
us. And as you evaluate it, it just makes so much sense that we would go to our loving
heavenly Father. Yep, it's me again. I sinned. I sinned. It's wicked. It's ungodly. We don't
sugar coat it. It's a transgression against the law. And I know that you love me, and
I'm asking that you forgive me. Restore the fellowship. See, you know one of the things
that's interesting to me, and I feel like sometimes as 21st century Christians it's
almost like we don't fully grasp it. You know what's really terrible about sin in the life
of a believer? It hinders our fellowship with our Father. Do you think for a moment that
these 10 sons of Jacob had proper fellowship with Jacob, with all those going on? No. They
can't have that proper communion and fellowship with their Father. And our heavenly Father,
I don't want to jeopardize that fellowship. I'm thankful that the relationship is constant.
I'm always going to be his son. He's always going to be my Father, because he gave me
eternal life. But I want the fellowship to be sweet. We sing the song, and how appropriate
it is, there's nothing between my soul and my Savior. Why? I don't want anything to hinder
my fellowship with God. And when we sin, we know this. We dealt with this on a Wednesday
night just a few weeks ago in 1 John chapter 2. We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous, and what a wonderful blessing that God gives us. This evening we
see that Jacob wept for Joseph. We see the circumstances surrounding it, but I hope that
we'd grab that spiritual application, and as we look at the behavior of those boys,
we say, I don't, that's not behavior that's exemplary. I don't want to follow that type
of behavior. I don't want to cover sin in my life. I want to confess it and forsake
it and have forgiveness. Let's pray together. Father, we love you this evening. We thank
you for loving us. We thank you for the Bible and for the truth of your Word. We thank you
for the historical account that we receive in this portion of Scripture, but as we think
of the spiritual application, how we're challenged in our lives. Lord, I thank you for how this
passage in Genesis 37 leads so easily tonight into our observance of the Lord's Supper.
As we understand that this table that is before us is not only a table of remembrance, though
it is, it's also a table of examination. And God, I pray that there'd be, even as the
songwriter said, nothing between my soul and my Savior. God, I pray that as we examine
ourselves that, God, you'd help us to be honest, humble, help us to confess and forsake, help
us to have the mercy and the forgiveness that you promise. I pray, Lord, that you would
help us to refuse to cover and excuse sin in our lives. We would not follow the pattern
that was established by Adam and Eve and Rachel and these sons of Jacob and Achan and David
and so many others. God, we'd come to you and find mercy. Bless now as we observe the
Lord's Supper. I pray, Lord, that you would move and work as only you can, and we'll thank
you for it. In Christ's name we pray. Amen.